data/README.md, before:

# Data
This directory will contain the raw `.fasta` files to be processed using k-mer analysis, generating `.csv` files.

## On GISAID Data
For data obtained from GISAID, only **accession numbers** will be included in this and the root README files' references. GISAID (2012) gives the following reason:

> GISAID does not promote the release of data to databases where access to data is anonymous and the rights of the submitter are relinquished.  GISAID already provides the public with open access to data in a transparent way.

All GISAID data are stored in `data/GISAID`, but the contents won't be committed (via `.gitignore`).

### GISAID Directory Usage
To devs: To use the GISAID directory, open the Google Drive folder shared by the mentor, and then navigate to `data/GISAID`. Copy the contents of that (`.tar` files) into your local repo's `data/GISAID`. The aforementioned directory has to be updated every time there's a change in the data.

---
## References
GISAID. (2012). FAQ. https://gisaid.org/help/faq/

Commit message:

feat: pipeline fully working, except for generate_treemap and generate_heatmap, committed data/overview, also revised data/README.md, please read

data/README.md, after:

# Data
`data/GISAID` contains the raw GISAID data to be fed to the pipeline's entry point, `code/R/preprocess.R`.
If `write_fastacsv <- TRUE` in the `code/pipeline-X.R` files, `data/interm` will additionally contain intermediate but thoroughly sanitized FASTA and metadata files of the entire[^1] and the subsampled dataset.
As such, `data/interm` can be used to fix value issues in the raw GISAID datasets.
See `get_sample` and `sanitize_sample` in code/R/preprocess.R for all the relevant issues and fixes.
Moreover, `data/overview` contains overviews (in .txt, .csv, and plots) of the entire[^1] and the subsampled dataset.

## On Timestamps[^1]
Generated files in `data/interm`, `data/overview`, and `data/kmers` are timestamped according to
when they were generated. The timestamps have the format `YYYYMMDDHHMMSSNNN`. Note that
a timestamp is generated at the top of the pipeline and only passed to succeeding functions.
Some pipeline functions can also work without getting a timestamp by ordering the files
and selecting the most recent one (cc: @d1w1rm4 and @JohnFelices528).

**[^1]:** Untimestamped files in `data/interm`, `data/overview`, and `data/kmers` are
files that contain generated data pertaining to the ENTIRE dataset (all samples in GISAID included).

## On GISAID Data
For data obtained from GISAID, only **accession numbers** will be included in this and the root README files' references. GISAID (2012) gives the following reason:

> GISAID does not promote the release of data to databases where access to data is anonymous and the rights of the submitter are relinquished.  GISAID already provides the public with open access to data in a transparent way.

All GISAID data are stored in `data/GISAID`, but the contents won't be committed (via `.gitignore`).

### GISAID Directory Usage
To devs: To use the GISAID directory, open the Google Drive folder shared by the mentor, and then navigate to `data/GISAID`. Copy the contents of that (`.tar` files) into your local repo's `data/GISAID`. The aforementioned directory has to be updated every time there's a change in the data.

---
## References
GISAID. (2012). FAQ. https://gisaid.org/help/faq/
